The Lifeguard on the Brown Couch The old
mastiff had chosen the middle cushion because it
was not the most comfortable place to sit,
which made it naturally the most important.
From there, he could see nearly everything.
He could see the pool, blue and square
and full of trembling sunlight, doing its best
impression of the ocean despite being fenced in
by white bars and polite paving stones.
He could see the lounge chairs lined up
along the far side, turquoise cushions waiting with
the confidence of creatures who had never been
told no.
He could see the umbrellas, closed for now,
standing upright like guests who had arrived too
early and did not know where to put
their hands.
Most importantly, he could see the slide.
The slide was silent.
This was suspicious.
It curved into the water with the bland
innocence of something that had definitely caused shouting
before.
The old mastiff knew its kind.
Children climbed it with wet feet and wild
plans.
Grown-ups pretended they were too dignified for
it, right up until somebody said, Come on,
just once, and then dignity became a towel
abandoned on a chair.
Today, though, the slide waited.
The pool waited.
The whole backyard waited in that odd hush
that comes just before people arrive with snacks.
The mastiff's name was probably something noble, Brutus,
perhaps, or Duke, or Winston.
Imagine if the family had a sense of
theater and a fondness for giving serious names
to animals who drooled on outdoor furniture.
Whatever his name was, he wore it loosely,
the way he wore his collar, as a
fact, not a burden.
He sat with his back curved slightly, his
heavy paws folded together, his face turned toward
the water.
He was not sad, exactly.
He had the look of someone remembering a
rule he had invented himself and was now
too honorable to break.
No dogs in the pool.
This rule had been spoken many times by
many people in many tones, firmly, lovingly, with
a finger raised, with a towel already in
hand, once, long ago, with a voice that
tried very hard not to laugh.
He remembered that day, not in the way
people remember things, with dates and weather and
who said what first.
Dogs remember with the body, the slick shock
of tile, the cold blue surprise, the great
splash, the shouting, the taste of chlorine, the
admiration of one small child who had whispered,
he's like a bear, as if bears were
known for their excellent pool manners.
Since then, he had taken up supervision.
It suited him.
The patio was shaded beneath a roof held
by stone pillars, and the wicker furniture had
been arranged in a square, as though the
family often gathered there to discuss serious matters,
such as hamburgers, sunscreen, and whether anyone had
seen the good pool goggles.
A glass-topped table sat in front of
him, reflecting his broad shape in a softened,
watery way.
In the reflection, he looked almost ghostly, a
second dog beneath the surface, watching from another
room.
He ignored it.
A younger dog might have barked at himself.
A younger dog might have tried to step
on the table or lick the glass or
accuse the reflection of trespassing.
But age brings wisdom, or at least a
tired politeness.
He had met the dog in the table
before.
Neither of them was going anywhere.
Beyond the fence, the water moved in small
private conversations.
A breeze passed over it, then through the
plants, then beneath the umbrellas, then under the
mastiff's ears.
He lifted his nose, considering the day.
There was damp stone, warm dust, the faint
chemical cleanness of the pool, a flower somewhere,
a bird with poor judgment, the memory of
bacon from breakfast still clinging to the house,
though breakfast itself had vanished under mysterious human
circumstances.
And there was something else, a sound from
inside, not a loud sound, not yet, just
a sliding drawer, a cabinet, the soft thump
of a cooler being set down, the clink
of ice, which to people meant drinks and
to dogs meant that summer had begun arranging
itself.
His ears shifted.
He did not move.
This was the discipline of a professional.
Inside, the people were preparing.
They believed they were in charge of the
afternoon.
They had made lists.
They had bought paper plates.
Someone had remembered napkins, though no one would
remember where they put them.
Someone had said, We'll keep it simple, which
was how people summoned complexity.
The mastiff had seen all this before.
Soon the gate would open.
Voices would spill across the patio.
Feet would slap against stone.
The quiet lounge chairs would be claimed, abandoned,
claimed again.
The slide would begin its work.
The pool would receive cannonballs, apologies, lost toys,
and at least one adult who would insist
the water was fine while making the face
of a person betrayed by nature.
And somewhere in the middle of it, someone
would put down a plate, not carelessly, not
exactly, just low, just for a moment.
The mastiff blinked slowly.
He had no plan.
Plans were for cats and people with calendars.
He had only a deep respect for opportunity
and a lifetime of being underestimated by those
who confused slowness with innocence.
Still, that was later.
For now, the moment held.
The backyard seemed to belong to him alone,
and he carried it with the solemn care
of an old king presiding over a kingdom
of cushions and tile.
There was comfort in the way everything stayed
where it had been put, the blue chairs
in the sun, the potted plant on the
ledge, the little dark drain in the patio
floor, round as a button, waiting to swallow
whatever the day spilled.
He looked at the pool, and the pool
looked back.
Perhaps he was thinking of the family.
Perhaps he was watching for the first small
person to appear at the door.
Perhaps he was listening for the voice that
always called him Buddy in a tone reserved
for both dogs and inconvenient furniture.
Or perhaps, in the large, quiet chamber of
his doggish heart, he understood something people often
miss while setting out cups, that every ordinary
day has a small hinge hidden inside it.
A door opens.
A child laughs.
Ice shifts in a cooler.
A wet hand lands on an old dog's
head.
Nothing grand announces itself.
No trumpet sounds over the patio.
The umbrellas do not unfurl in recognition.
The slide does not bow.
But the day changes.
So he waited on the middle cushion, where
he could see nearly everything, and guarded the
blue water from silence.
And when the first voice finally called from
inside, where is he?
The old mastiff did not turn around.
He only wagged his tail once, against the
wicker.
A soft royal knock.
The kingdom was open.